TEP-0114: Custom Task Beta - User Guide (#5677)
tektoncd/pipeline: docs/customruns.md

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Configuring a `CustomRun`](#configuring-a-customrun)
  - [Specifying the target Custom Task](#specifying-the-target-custom-task)
  - [Cancellation](#cancellation)
  - [Specifying `Timeout`](#specifying-timeout)
  - [Specifying `Retries`](#specifying-retries)
  - [Specifying Parameters](#specifying-parameters)
  - [Specifying Workspaces](#specifying-workspaces)
  - [Specifying Service Account](#specifying-a-serviceaccount)
- [Monitoring execution status](#monitoring-execution-status)
  - [Monitoring `Results`](#monitoring-results)
- [Code examples](#code-examples)
  - [Example `CustomRun` with a referenced custom task](#example-customrun-with-a-referenced-custom-task)
  - [Example `CustomRun` with an unnamed custom task](#example-customrun-with-an-unnamed-custom-task)
  - [Example of specifying parameters](#example-of-specifying-parameters)

# Overview

A `CustomRun` allows you to instantiate and execute a [Custom
Task](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0002-custom-tasks.md),
which can be implemented by a custom task controller running on-cluster. Custom
Tasks can implement behavior that doesn't correspond directly to running a

> workload in a `Pod` on the cluster. For Pod-based on-cluster workloads, you

Reviewer: Is there any way we can reword these guidelines around when to use a TaskRun vs CustomRun that don't focus on implementation details? For example, in the buildkit implementation of Tekton, TaskRuns don't run in a pod. (Maybe focusing on containers would be OK though.)

Reviewer: SG!

should use a [`TaskRun`](taskruns.md).

In order for a `CustomRun` to actually execute, there must be a custom task
controller running on the cluster that is responsible for watching and updating
`CustomRun`s which reference their type. If no such controller is running, `CustomRun`s
will have no `.status` value and no further action will be taken.

## Configuring a `CustomRun`

A `CustomRun` definition supports the following fields:

- Required:

>   - [`apiVersion`][kubernetes-overview] - Specifies the API version, for example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [`apiVersion`][kubernetes-overview] - Specifies the API version. Currently, only `tekton.dev/v1beta1` is supported.
```

    `tekton.dev/v1beta1`.
  - [`kind`][kubernetes-overview] - Identifies this resource object as a `CustomRun` object.
  - [`metadata`][kubernetes-overview] - Specifies the metadata that uniquely identifies the
    `CustomRun`, such as a `name`.
  - [`spec`][kubernetes-overview] - Specifies the configuration for the `CustomRun`.
    - [`customRef`](#1-specifying-the-target-custom-task-with-customref) - Specifies the type and
      (optionally) name of the custom task type to execute.
    - [`customSpec`](#2-specifying-the-target-custom-task-by-embedding-its-spec) - Embed the custom task resource spec
      directly in a `CustomRun`.
- Optional:
  - [`timeout`](#specifying-timeout) - specifies the maximum duration of a single execution
    of a `CustomRun`.

>   - [`retries`](#specifying-retries) - specifies the number of retures upon `CustomRun`failure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [`retries`](#specifying-retries) - specifies the number of retries to execute upon `CustomRun` failure.
```

  - [`params`](#specifying-parameters) - Specifies the desired execution
    parameters for the custom task.
  - [`serviceAccountName`](#specifying-a-serviceaccount) - Specifies a `ServiceAccount`

>     object that provides custom credentials for executing the `CustomRun`.

Reviewer: I'd suggest removing "provides custom credentials" since service accounts get permissions to do things via RoleBindings and ClusterRoleBindings or workload identity.

[kubernetes-overview]:
  https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/kubernetes-objects/#required-fields

### Specifying the target Custom Task

A custom task resource's `CustomSpec` may be directly embedded in the `CustomRun` or it may
be referred to by a `CustomRef`. But, not both at the same time.

1. [Specifying the target Custom Task with customRef](#1-specifying-the-target-custom-task-with-customref)
   Referring a custom task (i.e. `CustomRef` ) promotes reuse of custom task definitions.

2. [Specifying the target Custom Task by embedding its spec](#2-specifying-the-target-custom-task-by-embedding-its-spec)
   Embedding a custom task (i.e. `CustomSpec` ) helps in avoiding name collisions with other users within the same namespace.
   Additionally, in a pipeline with multiple embedded custom tasks, the details of entire pipeline can be fetched in a
   single API request.

#### Specifying the target Custom Task with customRef

To specify the custom task type you want to execute in your `CustomRun`, use the
`customRef` field as shown below:

```yaml
spec:
  customRef:
    apiVersion: example.dev/v1alpha1
    kind: Example

> ```

Reviewer: Would it be possible to use more realistic examples? For some custom tasks, it might make sense to define the custom task once on the cluster and reference it multiple times, and for others, creating a new CustomRun might make more sense. Also, apiVersion should be v1beta1, and I suggest including `kind: CustomRun`.

Author: Thanks Lee! It would be great if you have any example in your mind XD. Aslo @ScrapCodes Would like to hear if you have any existing Custom Task in your mind that we usually use them by referring a predefined Custom Task instead of embedded one? vice versa!

Reviewer: Thinking about this comment a bit more.. Giving good examples is a bit tricky. We don't want to write something that looks like you can actually use it, because we don't have any CustomRun controllers and we don't want users copy pasting the example and getting annoyed when it doesn't work. But at the same time I think the variable naming can "clue" ways we intend users to interact with this feature.

For example, here's a wait Task run (copied from experimental repo):
```
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Run
metadata:
  generateName: wait-run-
spec:
  ref:
    apiVersion: example.dev/v0
    kind: Wait
  params:
  - name: duration
    value: 10s
```
Maybe our example here could be:
```
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: CustomRun
spec:
  ref:
    apiVersion: example.dev/v0
    kind: MyCustomKind
  params:
  - name: duration
    value: 10s
```
Here, I'd imagine the user wouldn't want to specify a "name" in the custom task ref, because it's more useful to define duration on the run. (Duration is more of a runtime feature than an authoring time feature.)

The `pipeline-loop` custom task has some examples where it is useful to specify a name in the custom task ref (e.g. https://github.com/tektoncd/experimental/blob/main/pipeline-loops/examples/simplepipelineloop.yaml) and could be adapted similarly.

WDYT? This might be something we can iterate on in the future.

Author: Thanks Lee @lbernick, this is a very great discussion, I'm thinking about what the biggest benefit of defining unamed CustomRun would be:

I would say it's a benefit for Custom Task authors instead of Custom Task end users:

It enables Custom Task authors reconcile on `v1beta1.CustomRun` without defining a new CRD for the custom kind `MyCustomKind`.

Imagine the following case: I'm a Custom Task end user, I want to use `PipelineLoop`. I don't think It's possible for us to use `CustomRef` without specifying a name of an existing `PipelineLoop`.

wdyt?

Author: By any means, this can be a document improvement as part of https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/5775:
- For end users, clarify when to use `unnamed CustomRun` and `named CustomRun`
- For custom task authors, clarify whether they should support `unnamed CustomRun`

> This initiates the execution of a `CustomRun` of a custom task of type `Example`, in

Reviewer: Suggest clarifying the wording here, as this sounds a bit like Tekton will initiate the execution of a customrun when it is created, rather than the custom task controller being responsible for executing it.

Author: SG, rephrased it~

the `example.dev` API group,  with the version `v1alpha1`.

You can also specify the `name` and optional `namespace` (default is `default`)
of a custom task resource object previously defined in the cluster.

```yaml
spec:
  customRef:
    apiVersion: example.dev/v1alpha1
    kind: Example
    name: my-example
```

If the `customRef` specifies a name, the custom task controller should look up the
`Example` resource with that name, and use that object to configure the
execution.

If the `customRef` does not specify a name, the custom task controller might support
some default behavior for executing unnamed tasks.

In either case, if the named resource cannot be found, or if unnamed tasks are
not supported, the custom task controller should update the `CustomRun`'s status to

> indicate the error.

Reviewer: Could this be separated into a "Developer Guide for supporting CustomRef section"?

Author: Agreed, this would be part of the doc separation, will be tracked by https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/5775, I'd prefer to merge this PR in to get some momentum XD, but I can also be convinced that we should do it in this PR~

Reviewer: I'd prefer to do it in this PR, because the docs are being introduced in this PR, and because I don't think there's anything directly blocked by these docs right now, but could be convinced otherwise.

Author: If I'm not mistaken, per [the Pipelines WG](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1AfJfdyd1JN2P4haBdYOxEn6SMENMgvQF9ps7iF2QSG0/edit?resourcekey=0-lm66bE68HA_WVLA6AaCh6w#bookmark=id.kzvlbp8pb72) last Tuesday, we need to have documentation ready before releasing `v1beta1.CustomTask` in `v0.42` right?

Author: I can also try my best to separate the guide before v0.42 :) But I'm not sure if that can be merged in before scheduled release 🤔

Author: Thanks Lee~ @lbernick I'd prefer we make incremental updates :P

```

This initiates the execution of a `CustomRun` of a custom task of type `Example`, in
the `example.dev` API group,  with the version `v1alpha1`.

#### Developer guide for custom controllers supporting `customSpec`.

1. A custom controller may or may not support a `Spec`. In cases where it is
   not supported the custom controller should respond with proper validation
   error.

2. Validation of the fields of the custom task is delegated to the custom
   task controller. It is recommended to implement validations as asynchronous
   (i.e. at reconcile time), rather than part of the webhook. Using a webhook
   for validation is problematic because, it is not possible to filter custom
   task resource objects before validation step, as a result each custom task
   resource has to undergo validation by all the installed custom task
   controllers.

3. A custom task may have an empty spec, but cannot have an empty
   `ApiVersion` and `Kind`. Custom task controllers should handle
   an empty spec, either with a default behaviour, in a case no default
   behaviour is supported then, appropriate validation error should be
   updated to the `CustomRun`'s status.

### Cancellation

> Implementing cancellation is now `required` instead of `optional`. If the Custom Task implementor does not support cancellation via `.spec.status`, `Pipeline` timeouts and `PipelineRun` cancellation will not work properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementing cancellation is `required`. If the Custom Task implementor does not support cancellation via `.spec.status`, `Pipeline` timeouts and `PipelineRun` cancellation will not work properly.
```

Author: Updated~ Thanks!

> Pipeline Controller sets the `spec.Status` and `spec.StatusMessage` to signal `CustomRuns` about the `Cancellation`, while `CustomRun` controller **MUST** update its `status.conditions` as following once noticed the change on `spec.Status`.

Reviewer: We could probably use some background on what custom task controllers are expected to do with status in general. (probably copied from https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0002-custom-tasks.md#status-reporting)

Reviewer: I'd prefer adding it in this PR-- it's sort of confusing to have instructions about what to do with the status in case of retries or cancelation without understanding the basics of the status in the first place

Author: SG, updated!

| Pipeline Signal| `spec.Status` | `spec.StatusMessage` | `status.Conditions` | 
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:---|
|Parent `PipelineRun` is cancelled | `RunCancelled` | `CustomRun cancelled as the PipelineRun it belongs to has been cancelled. `| `Type: Succeeded`<br>`Status:False`<br>`Reason:CustomRunCancelled` |
|`Pipeline` timeouts | `RunCancelled` | `CustomRun cancelled as the PipelineRun it belongs to has timed out.`| `Type: Succeeded`<br>`Status:False`<br>`Reason:CustomRunCancelled`|

> Note: Custom Task implementors **MUST NOT** update the value of `spec.StatusMessage` and `spec.Status`, because Pipeline Controller depends the two fields.

Reviewer: this is a bit confusing-- custom task controllers are responsible for changing the status of the customrun, and shouldn't have a reason to change its spec.

### Specifying `Timeout`

A custom task specification can be created with `Timeout` as follows:

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Run

> metadata:

Author: Updated

  generateName: simpleexample
spec:
  timeout: 10s # set timeouts here.
  params:
    - name: searching
      value: the purpose of my existence
  customRef:
    apiVersion: custom.tekton.dev/v1alpha1
    kind: Example
    name: exampleName
```

Supporting timeouts is optional but recommended.

#### Developer guide for custom controllers supporting `Timeout`

1. Tekton controllers will never directly update the status of the `CustomRun`, 
   it is the responsibility of the custom task controller to support timeout.
   If timeout is not supported, it's the responsibility of the custom task
   controller to reject `CustomRun`s that specify a timeout value.

> 2. On a `pipelineRun` or `pipelineTask` timeout, the status of the 

Reviewer: I think this is an implementation detail that custom task controllers don't need to know.

   `CustomRun.Spec.Status` is updated to `RunCancelled`. The custom task controller
   MUST cancel the `CustomRun`. Otherwise, pipeline-level `Timeout` and
   `Cancellation` won't work for the Custom Task.
3. A Custom Task controller can watch for this status update
   (i.e. `CustomRun.Spec.Status == RunCancelled`) and or `CustomRun.HasTimedOut()`
   and take any corresponding actions (i.e. a clean up e.g., cancel a cloud build,
   stop the waiting timer, tear down the approval listener).
4. A Custom Task author can differentiate between a `CustomRun` cancelled by an user

>    from a Run cancellation initiated by a PipelineRun by looking at the 

Reviewer: I'm not sure the custom task controller needs to know why the custom task was canceled (beyond info present in the message) or what canceled it. Is this StatusMessage part of the api?

Reviewer: Sorry, I should have been more clear, the field `StatusMessage` is indeed part of the API, but do we make guarantees about what that message will be? I think it's intended to be human readable and there's a reasonable chance we might want to change it. I'd just put here that "StatusMessage displays a human-readable reason for the cancelation."

Author: Makes sense! 👍 Even though Pipeline Controller relies on the `spec.StatusMessage` to distinguish the different cancellation, it's an unnecessary info for CustomRun controllers, we shouldn't guarantee what we'd put in this field and Custom Run controller shouldn't rely on this field.

   `CustomRun.Spec.StatusMessage`. If a Run cancellation has been initiated by a
   cancellation of a PipelineRun then `CustomRun.Spec.StatusMessage` is
   `"CustomRun cancelled as the PipelineRun it belongs to has been cancelled."`. 
5. Once resources or timers are cleaned up, while it is **REQUIRED** to set a
   `conditions` on the `CustomRun`'s `status` of `Succeeded/False` with an optional
   `Reason` of `CustomRunTimedOut`.
6. `Timeout` is specified for each `retry attempt` instead of all `retries`.

### Specifying `Retries`

A custom task specification can be created with `Retries` as follows:

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1

> kind: Run

Author: Good catch! Thanks Yongxuan

and any output `results` reported by the custom task controller.

The following example shows the `status` field of a `CustomRun` that has executed
successfully:

```yaml
completionTime: "2019-08-12T18:22:57Z"
conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2019-08-12T18:22:57Z"
    message: Execution was successful
    reason: Succeeded
    status: "True"
    type: Succeeded
startTime: "2019-08-12T18:22:51Z"
```

The following tables shows how to read the overall status of a `CustomRun`:

`status`|Description
:-------|-----------:
<unset>|The custom task controller has not taken any action on the Run.
Unknown|The custom task controller has started execution and the Run is ongoing.
True|The CustomRun completed successfully.
False|The CustomRun completed unsuccessfully, and all retries were exhausted.

In any case, the custom task controller should populate the `reason` and
`message` fields to provide more information about the status of the execution.

### Monitoring `Results`

After the `CustomRun` completes, the custom task controller can report output
values in the `results` field:

```
results:
- name: my-result
  value: chicken
```

> ## Code examples

Reviewer 2: @XinruZhang it'd be helpful to implement CustomRun for the Wait Custom Task and reference them in the code examples, but that could be done in another change

Author: Agreed, I created an issue to track the example controller implementation: https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/5754.

Reviewer 2: sounds great!

   termination status of a `CustomRun`, therefore Custom task implementors
   MUST NOT set `ConditionSucceeded` to `False` until all retries are exhausted.
2. Those custom tasks who do not wish to support retry, can simply ignore it.
3. It is recommended, that custom task should update the field `RetriesStatus`
   of a `CustomRun` on each retry performed by the custom task.
4. Tekton controller does not validate that number of entries in `RetriesStatus`
   is same as specified value of retries count.

### Specifying `Parameters`

If a custom task supports [`parameters`](tasks.md#parameters), you can use the
`params` field in the `CustomRun` to specify their values:

```yaml
spec:
  params:
    - name: my-param
      value: chicken
```

If the custom task controller knows how to interpret the parameter value, it
will do so. It might enforce that some parameter values must be specified, or
reject unknown parameter values.

### Specifying Workspaces and Service Account

A `CustomRun` object can specify workspaces and a service account name.
These can be used to share data, or specify the identity to run the `CustomRun`.
Not all custom tasks will support these values.

> Consult the documentation of the custom task that you are using to determine whether these values apply.

Reviewer 2: why are these two grouped together? seems that they should be their own sections 🤔

Author: There were another `podTemplate` grouped with these two, I deleted it. You are right, we should split them~ Updated.

```yaml
spec:
  serviceAccountName: my-account
```

Consult the documentation of the custom task that you are using to determine whether it supports a service account name.

## Monitoring execution status

As your `CustomRun` executes, its `status` field accumulates information on the
execution of the `CustomRun`. This information includes start and completion times,
and any output `results` reported by the custom task controller.

The following example shows the `status` field of a `CustomRun` that has executed
successfully:

```yaml
completionTime: "2019-08-12T18:22:57Z"
conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2019-08-12T18:22:57Z"
    message: Execution was successful
    reason: Succeeded
    status: "True"
    type: Succeeded
startTime: "2019-08-12T18:22:51Z"
```

The following tables shows how to read the overall status of a `CustomRun`:

`status`|Description
:-------|-----------:
<unset>|The custom task controller has not taken any action on the Run.
Unknown|The custom task controller has started execution and the Run is ongoing.
True|The CustomRun completed successfully.

> False|The CustomRun completed unsuccessfully.

Reviewer 2: clarify here as well that all retries must be completed
